To understand Neutron Degeneracy pressure and how it arises, we must first understand Pauli's Exclusion Principle.

## Pauli and his Principle
The Pauli Exclusion Principle is something that we all encounter on a daily basis. It is the
law of the universe that prevents your laptop from falling through your lap. Formally, it
states that two Fermions (the particles that make up most matter) cannot occupy the same quantum states. More informally, two things cannot be in the same place, at the same energy level, with the same spin, at the same time. In neutron stars, this means that when mere heat is insufficient to halt collapse, the particles physically bumping into each other halts it instead.

This is neutron degeneracy pressure. 
To gain a more detailed understanding, we need Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle. 

## Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle
Formally, the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle states:

$$\Delta x \Delta p \ge \frac{\hbar}{2}$$

Let's break that down. $\Delta x$ refers to the uncertainty in position, which you can think of as
how many places the particle could be in. $\Delta p$ refers to the uncertainty in momentum, which you can also think of as the range of values that its momentum (velocity times mass) could take. $\hbar$ is known as the reduced Planck constant, and being a constant, it is not relevant to our understanding here.

## Inside Neutron Stars
So how is this relevant? In neutron stars, where pressures are extreme and particles
are compacted similarly extremely together, $\Delta x$ is very small. Correspondingly, this means
that $\Delta p$ must be very large. This leads to very high momentum (you can't be uncertain about momentum you don't have).

We can see, then, that if high compression necessitates low position uncertainty, and low position uncertainty means high momentum, and high momentum means high energy, a tremendous amount of energy is required to squeeze neutron stars any further. This manifests itself as an outward pressure of sorts, referred to as degeneracy pressure. Matter, such as the plasmas in neutron stars, that is stopped from being crushed mainly by degeneracy pressure is known as degenerate matter. 