# Neutron Stars

You may have heard of neutron stars before, but what really are they?
Neutron stars are very nearly the densest objects in the universe. 
Rarely more than a couple dozen kilometers across, but with masses comparable
to our sun, they are eclipsed only in extremeness by black holes.
But how do they form?

When giant stars die, they can go supernova -- i.e. explode with the power
output of an entire galaxy -- and form one of two things. If the star was big enough,
then the remnants of the star rushing inwards before the explosion get close enough
together that gravity can overcome the Pauli Exclusion principle (we'll get to that later)
and form a black hole, with a singularity of infinite density and extreme mass.

If the star wasn't quite massive enough, though, what's formed is instead a neutron
star, and that's where things get weird. Normal stars are permanently in a precarious balance
between collapse and expansion, with the inward force of gravity and the outward force of
the continuous nuclear fusion in the star balancing out, by necessity. Neutron stars
are different, though; they're stopped from collapsing by the Pauli Exclusion principle.
But what is this principle?

<details>
<summary>Self Check</summary>

What is your favourite language?
<form>
  <input type="radio" id="html" name="fav_language" value="HTML">
  <label for="html">HTML</label><br>
  <input type="radio" id="css" name="fav_language" value="CSS">
  <label for="css">CSS</label><br>
  <input type="radio" id="javascript" name="fav_language" value="JavaScript">
  <label for="javascript">JavaScript</label>
</form> 
<button onclick="check()">Submit</button>
<div id='test'></div>

<script>
function check() {
    document.getElementById("test").innerText = "Wow! You like " + document.querySelector('input[name = "fav_language"]:checked').value;
}
</script>

</details>

## Pauli and his Principle

The Pauli Exclusion principle is something that we all encounter on a daily basis. It is the
law of the universe that prevents your laptop from falling through your lap. Formally, it
states that two Fermions (the particles that make up most matter) cannot occupy the same
quantum states. More informally, two things cannot be in the same place, at the same energy
level, with the same spin, at the same time. In neutron stars, this means that when mere
heat is insufficient to halt collapse, the particles physically bumping into each other provides
the necessary pressure.

This is referred to as electron degeneracy pressure. To understand it more specifically, we
must introduce another principle: Heisenberg Uncertainty. Formally, the Heisenberg
Uncertainty principle states:

$$\Delta x \Delta p = \frac{\hbar}{2}$$

Let's break that down. $\Delta x$ refers to the uncertainty in position, which you can think of as
in how many places the particle could be. $\Delta p$ refers to the uncertainty in momentum, which
you can also think of as the range of values that it's momentum (Velocity times Mass) could
take. $\hbar$ is known as the planck constant, and being a constant, is not relevant to our
understanding here.

So how is this relevant? In neutron stars, where pressures are extreme and particles
are compacted similarly extremely together, $\Delta x$ is very small. Correspondingly, this means
that $\Delta p$ must be very large. This leads to very high momentum (you can't be uncertain about
momentum you don't have). Since electrons are much less massive than proton and neutrons,
this means that they have exceptionally high velocity, even in the confused particle soup
of neutron stars, and contribute the most to the outward pressure.


## Why they're called neutron stars

As you may have guessed, Neutron stars are made of neutrons
## The structures of Neutron Star
# Quark Stars
# Now things get Strange